I am professor of Russian history I
teach Russian history courses and I
direct the Russian Studies program and
the MIT Russia program my co-organizer
is Karel Savitz who is senior research
associate at the Security Studies
Program and the real maker and shaker of
for this program is Michelle English
formerly Michelle News who is running us
we've got this all organized for the
star forum so welcome to the Trump Putin
phenomenon with our amazing speakers
Julia Yaffa and garry kasparov I'm gonna
make a couple of very quick
announcements before we turn to our
speakers which is the most important
thing we've got a couple of interesting
events coming up in CIS that we're up on
the screen before we have a sign-up
sheet outside if you want more Russia
related events or more International
Studies events do sign up for our
mailing lists Center for International
Studies the Security Studies program in
the MIT Russia program co-founder co
organizing this and all three have very
interesting speaker series quick
announcement on September 28th
Idina profit over the editor-in-chief of
the new literary observer and a renowned
cultural historian will be speaking on
Russia's Russian society at the turning
point new strategies in the struggle for
democratic values that talk will be at
5:00 p.m. on the September 28th in e4 t
496 on October 25th
ledya Mercado Murtaza a very famous
Russian dissident an opposition
politician who has been much suffering
under the Russian regime will be
speaking on showing his film Nemtsov
about buddies Nemtsov who was a not
opposition politician initially but
eventually ended up being of course very
critical of the regime and who was
murdered by whoever he was murdered by
that has not been solved that that one
October 25th will show the film of
Nemtsov and dr. Carter Mirza will be
here to answer questions himself another
exciting event and on November 13th
MacPhail Ziegler who is a very well
known journalist the founder of the
independent TV station door shhhhht will
talk about his new book
the Emperor Empire must die which is
about the pre-revolutionary period but I
am certain he will talk about the
current Russian events as well so look
forward to those events we will have
each of the speakers speak for 20
minutes then we will have mics we really
insist that you keep your questions as
questions not comments this is a
wonderful audience it's a big audience
keep them to questions okay let me say
quick words Julie Alfa was born in
Russia but raised in the United States
she's covered national security and
foreign policy issues for the Atlantic
the New Republic The New Yorker foreign
policy Columbia Journalism Review
Politico Washington Post and actually
many others she was a history major
how many history majors do we have at
Princeton and she's been fearlessly
taking on and analyzing a wide range of
complicated and controversial issues
garry kasparov
almost needs no introduction russian
chess grandmaster former world chess
champion chairman of the human rights
foundation writer political activists
he's been involved in political parties
including founding several of them
Democratic Party of Russia in 1990
Russia's choice in 1993 and in 2005
after he retired from chess the United
civil front he's been very involved in
working to preserve electoral democracy
in Russia in 2006 he and others formed
together to create a coalition called
other Russia lugia Rossio another
opposition coalition and in 2008 he
successfully tried to run for president
of Russia but of course his candidacy
was sidelined his books winter is coming
and deep thinking or will be sung he
will sign and will be sold at the event
outside after this event so without
further ado let me turn it over to Julia
Yaffa
[Applause]
[Music]
how awkwardly like slide my chair around
alright thank you all for coming out
thank you for having me it's weird to be
the first speaker cuz I'm gonna give you
a slightly more probably an argument
that you're not used to hearing the
American press the American maybe not as
much the American public has been
consumed with Russia Gate questions of
collusion between the Russian government
and the Trump administration Russian
cyberattacks etc and it's reached such a
fever pitch that I want to just cut
through the noise a little bit and talk
to you about what actually happened and
didn't happen and how we should look at
this so let's start with the report they
came out on January 6th to 2017 when the
Office of the Director of National
Intelligence released a document it was
a Declassified report two weeks before
Trump took the oath of office and the
conclusions that were pulled from the
CIA the NSA the FBI were stunning I
quote we assess that Russian President
Vladimir Putin ordered an influence
campaign in 2016 aimed at the u.s.
presidential election Russia's goals
were to undermine public faith in the
u.s. democratic process denigrate
Secretary Clinton and harm her
electability and potential presidency we
further assess that Putin and the
Russian government developed a clear
preference for president elect Trump we
have high confidence in these judgments
and quote case is not clear this is an
extraordinary series of statements first
of all they're saying that a foreign
power a longtime adversary Russia
interfered in our elections and not just
that they did so with the goal of
helping one candidate over the other and
what's also remarkable about this is
that the often fractious territorial
tribes inside the intelligence community
were unanimous in these conclusions and
reached them with high confidence
and when the report came out it
confirmed what a lot of us journalists
and a lot of people people in the
Democratic Party had been suspecting and
sometimes screaming about for at least
six months all those Twitter BOTS and
false news reports floating around
Facebook the hack of the Democratic
National Committee in the spring of 2016
WikiLeaks is perfectly timed email dumps
now it was clear that it was all part of
a coordinated covert influence operation
run by America's greatest adversary
Vladimir Putin they were not wrong the
Russian government did do all those
things but the DNI report raised as many
questions as it answered how did the
Russians get so good so fast did they
have help from from people inside the
Trump campaign or in the Republican
Party were the Russian actions actually
enough to change the outcome of the 2016
election did they in fact elect our
president and how did the intelligence
agencies know what they know and so the
great Washington scandal machine cranked
up in earnest committees hearing special
prosecutors leaks searing hot breaking
news and an endless parade of talking
heads on our television screens pining
about Trump and Putin and Hillary
Clinton and a cast of obscure Russian
characters if you're having a hard time
keep keeping up or seeing straight
you're not alone in fact I am too in
fact I wonder often if this is what 2002
felt like when Washington was abuzz with
news about Saddam Hussein and weapons of
mass destruction and Iraq and potential
invasion because after a decade and a
half of studying Russia after a decade
of living there and going back there for
reporting trips the narrative that I'm
seeing in the American media just does
not square with what I know and it does
not square with my instincts the
narrative we are now presented with goes
something like this
Vladimir Putin a cunning villain and
strategic mastermind driven by a
personal hatred of Hillary Clinton
decided to defeat her in the 2016
presidential election
and to elect his friend and vassal
Donald J Trump Trump is his vassal
because Putin has compromised on Trump
this is a trendy new word now compromise
and you know it got anything from girls
in a Moscow hotel room business loans
some kind of tape so the narrative goes
Trump owes Putin big which is why he's
so damn nice to Putin can't say bad word
about him praises him whenever he gets
the chance and what about all those
Slavic wives he's collected over the
years
coincidence anyway so Putin who is
detail-oriented and excels at complex
long-term strategic planning lined all
this up and maybe even conceived
convinced Trump to run against that old
horrible hag then Putin in close
coordination with Trump his campaign
manager Paul Manafort
son-in-law Jared Kushner and his son
Donald Trump jr. carefully orchestrated
a well-organized and finely-tuned
disinformation and cyber warfare
campaign to elect Trump so that he could
lift sanctions it's a very simplistic
black-and-white narrative and I just
does not square with what I know of
Russia or with my reporting so if you've
noticed most of this narrative is driven
by journalists and pundits president
company excluded who have little
knowledge of Russia and how it works as
a result the picture we get is garbled
by misinterpretation for example earlier
this week
Axios a washington media company put out
a report that a russian political figure
and pro-putin hawk bitches love nuke
enough went on TV and admitted that
russia elected trump which is you know
how historically covert influence
campaigns are revealed on TV then there
was then there was the matter a couple
weeks ago when the New York Times in the
Washington Post broke a series of
stories saying that Donald Trump and his
men on the ground in Moscow including
his personal lawyer Michael Cohen were
negotiating a real estate deal
or trying to negotiate a real estate
deal in Moscow in the fall of 2015 and
Michael Cohen wasn't getting anywhere
the Trump Organization wasn't getting
anywhere so what he did was he emailed
me three piece golf pox Minh and asked
for help on this real estate deal and
people in Washington went absolutely
insane and they said this is the most
high-level contact between the Trump
Organization and the Kremlin this is
positive we just blew the roof off the
White House to any of us who have been
in Moscow and this is absurd this would
be like emailing Sarah Huckabee Sanders
when you're trying to get to Ivanka
moreover Michael Cohen emailed his golf
at essentially press at Kremlin gov he
found the email on the web site it like
characterizing him as Putin's right-hand
man as some kind of high-level contact
it's just it's madness anyway much of
this story is also not coming out of
Moscow if you notice that ship does not
leak and local journal foreign
correspondents there are kind of sick
and tired of the story would rather get
on to what they think are more
interesting things so everything's
coming from here the leaks of from the
various congressional committees from
certain family members lawyers from our
security services and there's nothing to
balance out the picture from the Russian
side so today I want to adjust the
narrative a little bit and ditch the
black and white color color scheme and
get into the shades of grey a little bit
I'm not going to make that joke so let's
start with what Putin wanted to
accomplish personally I think that he
wanted to bloody Hillary Clinton's nose
so Putin is a former KGB guy and like
all former KGB guys and current FSB guys
they are all conspiracy theories a
theorists par excellence they really
believed that the establishment had it
tied up sewn up for Hillary Clinton that
her victory was guaranteed much like his
victory is guaranteed at
home and so he was just gonna bloody her
nose a little bit he did not expect
Donald Trump to win and it certainly
made America look foolish she made the
democracy look less than democratic
especially when you've got get the leaks
of the DNC emails about Bernie Sanders
etc and in part that's for domestic
consumption because ever since the end
of the cult or the end of the Cold War
the 90s when people in the Soviet Union
and in the Soviet orbit in Eastern
Europe we're looking West they wanted to
be like the West they wanted genes they
wanted cars they wanted McDonald's they
wanted Michael Jackson and they wanted
democracy but it turned out democracy
was really hard so if you if you make it
look impossible unattainable dirty that
it's not really democratic that there's
corruption everywhere and if every
everybody's the same and everyone is
equally bad then why don't you play for
your own team don't look toward the West
look toward the Kremlin let's talk about
where Russia actually did they conducted
a successful wide-ranging multi-pronged
covert influence campaign that included
disinformation cyber attacks and
well-timed leaks but what's important to
remember and everybody who saw the
intelligence in real time and afterwards
will tell you that this was a campaign
that was highly opportunistic and
improvised it was as one former Obama
advisor told me throwing spaghetti at
the wall they improvised as they went
along they didn't have this all written
out ahead of time and that gets to this
idea that Putin is this grand master of
strategy that he's in any way a
strategic thinker Putin knows where he
wants to go he has the kind of 30,000
foot idea which is basically make Russia
great again and make America respect
Russia which usually does by just
demanding that we respect Russia and
then he has the like first couple steps
planned out everything in between kind
of figures it out as he goes along that
makes him really good at outmaneuvering
the us it makes him really kind of deft
and the flexibility is power gives him
power but it also means that he's not
very good at anticipating the
consequences of those steps and blowback
so for example as I told you the
Russians believe that Clinton would get
elected and even then it's okay you
bloodied Hillary Clinton's nose you
believe she's going to become president
you didn't hide your tracks very well
and you kind of didn't hide your tracks
on purpose you wanted the Americans to
know that you were able to do this right
what the hell do you think is gonna
happen when Hillary Clinton becomes
president there's gonna be hell to pay
right okay they lucked out she didn't
become president Russians were super
happy they're popping champagne all over
Moscow they're having inauguration
watching parties right by the Kremlin
but then Trump can't lift sanctions he
can't give you back your spying
compounds he can't restore your
diplomatic staff that Obama cut in and
took away into in December 2016
and now the narrative in Russia is his
hands are tied his hands are tied by
this vehemently anti Russian foreign
policy national security establishment
the Russians right now are really
unhappy with how this turned out just
when you think about when you hear
people talking about how amazing Putin
is it's just planning everything they're
so pissed right now Trump as a mentor
and candidate I this makes me crazy
Putin did not create Trump we all know
this Trump was created by America Trump
is a very American phenomenon and the
ideology that he presented to the
American people in 2016 one of
isolationism xenophobia racism
capitalism on steroids it was not in
this kind of populism it's as American
as apple pie he was tapping into
political traditions that are at least a
hundred years old and as the one former
NSA director told me covert actions John
divisions on the ground covert actions
exploit them which is what happened here
just try to think of when you look at
this whole crazy conflagration that
political conflagration that 2016
created think of Russia as the bellos
rather than the logs or the or the fire
itself they're the ones fanning the
flames I think what also bothers me
about this narrative is it obscures our
role in 2016 the Russians actually did
not vote 60 some million people cast
their ballots for Donald Trump despite a
dozen women accusing him of sexual
assault
despite the racist misogynistic
Islamophobic xenophobic comments he made
despite his racist white supremacist
followers and his failure to denounce
them despite being the progenitor of the
birther controversy despite his constant
lying including about his success in
business despite not releasing his tax
returns I'm not going to take up 20
minutes with this but the Russians
didn't create that and the Russians
didn't make millions of Americans tens
of millions of Americans say yeah well
he's still better than her despite all
of that and one thing the Russian
certainly did not create is the racist
backlash to the first American a first
african-american president they didn't
create the ginned up and gauzy scandal
or 30 years of negative coverage of
Hillary Clinton
they didn't make Hillary Clinton have
that stupid email server
they didn't make call me open his mouth
they didn't create any of this and by
focusing on Russia exclusively as an
answer to what happened in 2016 we are
not looking in the mirror and asking how
we're responsible for this because
mostly we're responsible for this and
we're also not talking about a system
like the electoral college where 70
thousand votes are more important than 3
million votes and that actually makes us
very vulnerable it makes the system much
easier to manipulate if you can keep 300
people home
in one part of Wisconsin it doesn't
matter right how many people come out
and vote in the cities that makes it
again much more vulnerable I also think
that the way the media is reporting this
is extremely harmful every new
development just is reported like it
just blew the case wide open and Trump
is gonna be gone in a matter of days
it's not going to happen we're stuck
with this guy for the next three and a
half years and we have to deal with it
people when we report on this so
hysterically people burn out they stop
paying attention I mean I can't really
read the news anymore and if I can't and
I work in the news I can't imagine how
all of you guys feel and also it
provides the Trump administration cover
for you know like a noisy cover for
doing some really harmful long-lasting
things dismantling the EPA hacking the
courts with radical but very young
judges who will be with us for decades
to come
rolling back regulations changing DOJ
Sentencing Guidelines
etc etc the other thing is watch out for
speculation in the press on Russia gate
there is a lot we don't know and there's
a lot of facts we don't have there's a
lot of theories there's a lot of
speculation but there's a lot of things
we don't know here are some questions
I'm personally asking and trying to dig
into was Trump a laundromat for dirty
Russian money in New York if so how did
that work how much money went through
his buildings and are there corruption
charges to be made how did the Russian
government which barely understands the
America used to barely understand the
American political system gets so good
at micro targeting how did they know
what to do with the trove of information
they found when they stumbled into the
d-triple-c servers this is the
democratic committee to elect Democrats
to the House of Representatives how do
they keep how do they know which purple
districts in Florida for example to
target and to keep Democrats from
flipping them to blue did they have help
from the Trump campaign somebody in the
Republican Party like a local political
opera
or did they just do their homework did
Trump obstruct the investigation and the
most important question is did the
Russians do such a good job that they
change the outcome of the election that
question ultimately is impossible to
answer thank you
[Applause]
good afternoon thank you very much for
inviting me here Elizabeth just
mentioned two books that available here
first as winter is coming
it's not about Game of Thrones the
subtitle tells you ever saying it's why
Vladimir Putin and the enemies of the
free world must be stopped that was
released in 2015 and the last one this
year release deep-thinking it's quite
ironic that while I was in the book to
promoting winter's coming everybody
wanted to talk about IBM deep blue and
artificial intelligence now at least the
book on artificial intelligence and I'm
here at MIT to talk about which for many
years starting from 2005 earlier it's
myself my colleagues including great
boris nemtsov we kept warning the world
that rival addameer pudding was our
problem but eventually to be everybody's
problem just because we read some
history books and when you have it
worked with dictatorships they start
with making some friends so so
increasing their power and they end up
all of them by creating enemies because
they need enemies to justify the endless
stay in power and I remember that in May
2015 I was a guest at the Bill Maher
show in LA and I tried to raise the
awareness about Putin threat to this
country and to the free world and Bill
was very dismissive he kept telling me
that it's none of our concern and he
ended up saying wake me up when he takes
over Poland I was jumped on my chair
saying about eight years ago the similar
attitude led to the greatest disaster in
human history of course after the
elections 2016 bill has changed his
views blaming Putin
or everything including stealing
elections and I couldn't help but easy
him put in my Twitter that it seemed
that Putin decided to skip over Poland
and went straight to this console I'm
addicted to numbers and just looked at
some numbers and found out that
yesterday Vladimir Putin has passed
Brezhnev's records 6600 two days in
power by the way of course I counted
these the four years where his puppet
was sitting in his chair but it's quite
amazing the 21st century of someone who
is in power for 80 years and he's going
to stay there indefinitely so the bad
news we don't know how long we'll stay
the good news Yoshi doesn't know and as
I said he knows instinctively only he's
too smart and he read many books but
instinctively as someone who is in power
for so long he knows that right now
there's only one way for him to prove
him being worthy of power it's to
demonstrate that Russia is a besieged
fortress it's the and he's a white
knight defending Mother Russia against
walls even Russian television for years
is filled with America bashing my mother
she turned 80 so she was born under
Stalin she she still lived in Moscow and
she heard and so everything all sorts of
Soviet propaganda and she keeps telling
me that it couldn't it was never so bad
and so depressing because at least
Soviet propaganda tried to sell you fake
vision but still bright future somewhere
in the distant future we come this
Brotherhood we'll all be good to each
other
Putin's propaganda is different it's
more like cult of death it's all about
hatred it's all about wars
it's about conflicts and these no
there's no bright future he doesn't care
about it so that's why he needs enemies
and he is by the way quite good in
creating them because he knows it's it
is important and now
I don't want to disagree with was what I
heard from Julia because just you know
she's she's aiming at some of the
stories that are being inflated by the
by by the press but I think it's it's
it's important to look actually at at
certain facts or certain emissions on
Russian TV it's not just some Putin's
cronies you know boasting that they
elected Trump but something just for you
to chew on is that while Russian TV is
set 24/7 is filled with anti-american
propaganda I never heard a single
negative word about Donald Trump blaming
deep States yeah and say you name it not
a single negative word about Donald
Trump maybe a coincidence but just
another one for us to understand that
there were big expectations maybe it
still some expectations though I
understand that routing was quite
disappointed because the result of these
elections was not what he expected I
agree that I think Putin didn't have
great expectations for Trump's victory
probably they were looking for for an
argument against weaken Hillary Clinton
administration blaming them for rigged
elections and by the way it's quite
amazing when you follow Trump's campaign
you can always see the connection
between what he said and what was
eventually invented by Kremlin BOTS and
Kremlin propaganda so rigged elections
was the sort of the biggest tag in the
last couple of months but he won and
then there were other opportunities that
Putin wanted to exploit I agree Putin
hasn't invented Trump KGB doesn't invent
their agents they just look for them
they look for weak spots and I guess
that's you know if you look for KGB
playbook or just any playbook of
intelligence service what are the sort
of the top priorities for looking for a
potential weak spot women gambling money
just I think this candidate fit all
three now again I don't know whether
it's true or not all these reports and
we'll definitely find out more distance
D I think this the Kremlin gate will not
go away
but again it's important to actually see
certain connections and obviously Trump
was an ideal candidate that could be a
counterpart in completing the grand
bargain which was the Putin's dream
because he just realized that it's not
enough cheers to control everything in
Russia it's not enough to just influence
the so-called near abroad neighboring
countries after his invasion of Ukraine
which I have said predicted after his
invasion of the Republic of Georgia in
2008 not because I had a magic crystal
in front of me but because I looked at
the map
Putin realized that he would need
something to to some kind of bargaining
chips to negotiate with the free world
so he went to Syria that was a big hope
that he could actually bring Americans
down to the negotiating table that could
have set his actions in Ukraine and of
course he stepped up his attacks about
democracies he did it
in the neighboring countries and then he
moved beyond the perimeter of the former
Soviet Union his interference the
American election was not just an
isolated accident he has been trying to
do it all over the place you just look
at almost every election every
referendum in Europe and you can
definitely find out that Putin had an
interest and he was not shy of trying to
exercise this his influence and he had
just a long streak of successes when you
look at brexit and referendum in Holland
in 2016 about affiliation with a of
European Union with Ukraine elections in
Bulgaria in Moldova referendum in Italy
it's a pretty good record and and he put
and realized that while Russia today is
a pale shadow economically militarily of
the Soviet Union he controls enough
money from the more than any other
individual in the history of human race
so to buy favors and to run what they
call hybrid Wars to weaken the opponents
he's pretty good in clandestine
operations because let's not forget he
is not a military dictator he's a KGB
guy
and he plays his game actually I agree
with with Julis words about Putin not
being a good chess player because I'm
sick and tired hearing o Putin play
chess and Obama played checkers
yeah I feel that I have to defend the
integrity of my game and and the reason
this mysterious note the reason why
dictators don't play chess is quite
simple chess is the hundred percent
transparent game you could see all the
resources that your opponent can use
against you though we don't know that
his or her intentions but it's open
dictators hate transparency they don't
want to operate in this environment so
that's why I always think that Putin
like like a poker player because in
poker you can win having a weak hand if
you ready to Bluff to enter raise the
stakes and if you're just a good reader
of opponents mind and it's let's give
him credit
he's a good KGB agent so and you know
that opponent if you raise the stakes to
high opponent Wolf's fault his or her
cards so Putin keeps playing this
geopolitical casino and so far you know
he at certain point he thought that he
was I was doing it quite well and also
the chess at chess analogy this doesn't
work because chess is a strategic game
and here we have a very important point
about the nature pootis dictatorship
it's not a ideological dictatorship it's
a one-man dictatorship which is the most
unstable and dangerous form of
governments because it depends of the
image of one man and lend emphasize
about the image of one man when we look
back to the Soviet Union and the
Brezhnev or even cruise ship and the
Gorbachev it was collective leadership
like in China today I'm not saying
anything nice about this this this form
of government but you know that's if you
have a bunch of mafioso sitting in one
room they try to negotiate is it's not
good but you can expect them to be
balanced because they always look for
some kind of compromise one-man
dictatorship Hitler Stalin Mao
it's all about one man Putin knows that
he must look strong let me emphasize
look strong and how he looks strong
economy is crippled he oil will never go
back $200 a barrel so he will be running
out of funds eventually and he has to
create some kind of environment where he
can thrive what are these
cares and he's quite good in creating
that and he must defy the strongest
opponents to look strong himself what is
the strongest power in the world the
United States so that's why define US
presidents whether it was Obama or
tosto Trump Trump administration it's a
very important element of Putin's or
Putin's game and we just sometimes
underestimate this is the deeper game
which put in place and again I have to
using credit for for using this and most
of these things are for domestic
consumption you remember when Putin all
of a sudden decided to go to General
Assembly of United Nations in New York
in 2015 I remember that's this is just a
couple of days or just day after the
announcement I got a call from Wall
Street Journal that's better right in
the tutorial about Putin's visit I said
okay fine I can do tomorrow there's no
no but he was coming few days later so
but I know the outcome
just wide why should I wait it's not
about Putin speech it's about you know
the way he will present himself and the
most important moment was there that
there was not him speaking at the
Assembly he didn't care about it it was
a meeting with Obama do you remember
that the moment when they met and Obama
tried to reach out and Putin just took a
few moments just some kind of hesitancy
and then eventually shook his hand I bet
you he spent hours in front of the
mirror practicing that because it was
very important a very important element
of propaganda in Moscow what it showed
to the ordinary Russians the United
Nations in New York
putting had no choice but to go to the
belly of the beast to meet Obama and he
didn't want to shake his head but he did
next day Russian planes bombed
american-backed opposition in Syria that
tells you you know
everything this is a story but it is
very good in controlling this narrative
maybe it's his team it doesn't matter
but he understands the power of this of
this presentation that's how it works
in Russia today if you can follow
Russian talk shows they talk about
everything actually the opposite to
America here we can hardly find news
about the rest of the world in Russia
you can hardly find news about Russia
it's about everything
it's about Ukraine Baltic help us they
stayed Syria America not about Russia
because there's nothing to say about it
so let's and Putin keeps pushing pushing
this this narratives now going back to
to to to Trump's elections is that I
have been writing about crimes danger
from the very beginning of his campaign
I couldn't agree with Julia more that
it's it's an American phenomenon so
again Putin just utilized this
opportunity that was given to him and I
think now again when we look at at at
the Holy stories so I think I was
correct saying at one point that Trump
in the circle had more Russian
connections than Aeroflot but again the
good news is that Trump looks like an
autocrat he talks like autocrat
he walks like autocrat he wish being
quite important but he cannot act like
autocrat because unlike Russia America's
democracy is quite resilient but would
have found out here is just is that many
things that were taken for granted that
just based on some sort of code of honor
because it was it never happened before
so we assume it's not going to happen
now as the the two two terms a
presidency just follow the Washington's
tradition so and after FDR they came up
with the with an amendment
so Trump actually capitalized all these
little cracks in the system
everybody releases their taxes so what
show me show me the piece of paper I'm
not I'm not violating the law that's by
the way classical trick of every
would-be dictator so they always look
for an opportunity just not to violate
the law and
and always just try to capitalize just
by building brick by brick they're their
own rule that could be could eventually
overturn the the rule of rule of law
Putin was good at that and luckily Trump
tried but I think it's he failed and and
we again will find out more about about
his clandestine connections and he's in
a circle being engaged with with their
counterparts in Russia but what's
important is that we already could see
that his power is limited and I was
quite pleased to see that US Congress
limited his ability to interfere with
foreign politics specially in Russia by
passing the bill almost unanimously on
Russian sanctions I think that tweeted
next day saying call it it's a non
magnificent seven saying the only not
only seven people just were against it
so three in the house - two in the
Senate one in the White House and one on
Kremlin and and regarding Putin so I can
he will keep he'll be pushing looking
for this for this week's sports Panda
speaking about by the way the Russian
word compromise that now just made its
way to do - - English language yes I
thought that states we can look at the
linguistic contribution of different
Russian leaders into into foreign
languages
Khrushchev Sputnik Gorbachev perestroika
Putin compromise yeah and and as I said
it's a mafia rule that's why I always
encourage people to to read America's
Godfather because it tells you more
about Putin's Russia than any other
professional research and Putin
recognizes that as long as he looks
strong nobody will challenge him again
it's psychological so we will follow
back to Nazi Germany the the decisive
attempt on Hitler was made after d-day
after the invasion
of a second front when the generals
realized the war was over
so we hasn't we haven't reached this
point and Putin is is quite agile to
make sure that you know he always
creates new opportunities I believe that
the current crisis with North Korea is
man-made crisis because I wouldn't
believe for a second that the wretched
country with no economy and almost no
science in less than two years could
walk from very primitive nuclear
technology to the h-bomb and a missile
and a missile that could reach the
United States again create more problems
create cares and the Putin is pretty
good and he always looks at the map for
for an opportunity and and again
compromised or not says this it's going
back to bong to go back to trumpet in
this case I think we should assume the
worst it will be safer you know just
again I'm of course I am you know people
say you're Russia and you know you're
full of conspiracy yes I am yes oh is
you know as I said my book a narrow and
deep thinking yes I'm a sore loser
yeah you better confess your sins you
know just people used to to trust you
that is I understand my shortcomings but
in this case is so much at stake that I
would rather assume the worst
and again there's so many elements in
this picture that while I don't have any
information outside of the public domain
where I could read it and just collect
it as you do there's certain things that
tell me that it's the story is just it's
it's it's it's a long way down the
bottom to the bottom of the world
where we'll find the truth and for
instance let's take this infamous call
of Michael Flynn to Russian ambassador
on December 20 29 after Obama announced
his decision to seize that to property
matter properties and also to send a
sent of 35 Russian spies
disguises that diplomats typically
during the Cold War the response of the
other side was was simple and
straightforward the same mirror and by
the way nobody would say anything
because that set was a practice for
decades and Lavrov let's just follow
this just since almost buy our Lavrov
said Russia would do that then all of a
sudden radical Putin has overrule Lavrov
say why don't we do that
so let's you know invite the kids of
these diplomats to Christmas tree party
in the King Kremlin so what's happened
again dictator cannot afford to week
that's a sign of weakness not to respond
and by the way after recent events I'm
in Russia and just you know Putin was
not shy to sent of 750 ok many of them
were actually Russians working there but
he could you know it could reduce
American diplomatic presence in Russia
to bare bones again the problem was not
of reducing American presence there I
think the problem was that he got a call
from Washington's Russian ambassador
informed him about conversations Michael
Flynn now I don't know if Donald Trump
knew about Michael Flynn calling
ambassador ki slack it doesn't matter
what is important is they trusted that
Michael Flynn could speak on behalf of
Donald Trump promising that they would
go back and just restore Russian
diplomatic presence and it could be it
could undermine their efforts to improve
relations so it means to me and there's
only one explanation
they have been work use Michael Flynn
they trusted him and they believe that
Trump would follow for his
recommendations there's no other
explanation
again well lucky it was it was recorded
and it ended up was Flynn just being
fired in disgrace and the grand bargain
that has been proved that has been
prepared I think putting a dream of
doing the Yalta and imagine is how easy
to sell to Donald Trump in yalta Putin
will be like Stalin you'll be like FDR
grand bargain dividing the world who
cares about always Estonia Latvia
Bulgaria's we're here big guys making
big deals we decide the future of the
world can you sell to Trump something
tells me you can and now just finish in
my remarks I think it just i can end up
actually praising Donald Trump for
winning elections because for many years
I heard here in this country and in
Europe it's not our problem it's your
problem Russia Korea China it's not a
big deal it's not going to happen here
are you sure
I assure that democracy and freedom is
not more than one generation away from
extinction
are you sure that it's you are not
leaving and the threat of a would-be
dictator stealing power and just
imposing his his rule again American
democracy proved to be resilient but
it's very important to remember that
it's it's it's nothing as Carmen stole
and what was what Trump victory did for
this country and for the world it was a
wake-up call
it's very important people are getting
engaged and by the way the good news
from from the other side of Atlantic it
basically destroyed European alt-right
we just look at the results of the
elections after Trump's victory
they all went downhill those that were
on the rise almost irreal celebrating
the imminent victories like marine lepen
in france you can find them anymore
and by the way French election was
another interesting story because Putin
had smart bets there were out of four
leading candidates macron fian lepen and
Mellon strong Putin was betting on three
you know just three so this is the best
bet far left radical melons shown theone
who was just in his pocket as as Sarkozy
so and of course middle more in the pen
Opel is supported and they lost my
reaction was that it seems put a run out
of his trump card
yeah and just to give another proof of
this of the of importance of
participation of the of the public of
the of our active engagement in politics
just another look at another European
country Holland I just mentioned in 2016
in March there was a referendum that was
imposed obviously just you know by by an
outside force because who cares in
Holland about affiliate affiliation
agreement with Ukraine but in European
Union you need consensus so that's why
there was one country where there was a
powerful political force heard worlders
another all tried movement that all of a
sudden decided to push the referendum
idea
they won 62 percent of the voters voted
against it ended up that the government
decided to ratify it
anyway but still it was a big victory
and of course it was trumpeted by Putin
as the will of Europeans just to go
against imposed affiliation with Ukraine
next year everybody expected her rulers
to win the elections okay in Holland
that many political parties so he
couldn't win outright majority but
everybody thought he would be sort of it
would be leading party he was the I
think there was a force of the fifth
with a bigger 14% what was a difference
simple in 2016
32% of that voters voted came to the 2d
to the polling stations in 2017 81% so
that's the big lesson and that's why I
still have hope in representative
democracy and as I believe that no
matter how intricate is a conspiracy
created by KGB so we still should win
yeah I got a Verano
so when Elizabeth and I were trying to
structure our conversation we decided
that each of us would throw out one
question to our speakers and then we
would open up the conversation to the
audience and there are mics in both
aisles so please and make sure you ask a
question and don't give a speech so the
two of you don't really disagree I think
there's a tremendous amount of overlap
with but it brings me really to two
questions the first is so what does
Vladimir Putin do now Donald Trump was
elected maybe that's good maybe that's
bad but the backlash against what we
know about Russian interference has
certainly made it harder to craft that
grand bargain as one of you refer to it
so that's where do you see Russian
policy towards the United States going
in the next year so the second question
that it raises with me is where are
Putin's vulnerabilities there's been
some speculation among some Russian
language pundits etc to say well Putin's
really not as strong and the systems
really not as strong as everybody seems
to think it is where are his
vulnerabilities so I throw that out to
both of you
I think vulnerability is that he's
mortal and he's going to die at some
point and this Gary pointed out that is
the main when you built a highly
personalized micro managed system your
mortality is your main vulnerability
this is this is the core of the
instability of the Russian regime it is
I think it is a regime that is
fundamentally strong and fundamentally
weak it is weak because everything how
do I describe it's a very inefficient
way to govern when you have a guy at the
top giving a signal and then you have
this bloated bureaucracy between him and
that signal trickling down each step and
each at each step people try to
interpret what's going on what he wanted
how do we over fulfill our
and so my favorite example of this was
when he was running for president in
2012 and it was on in the midst of
massive pro-democracy protests and there
was there was a fear inside the Kremlin
that Putin would be forced into a runoff
you can't look weak the national leader
doesn't have to go to a second round he
wins outright so that was the signal
given Putin has to win outright deliver
51 52 percent make it look legit
and we can all move on so the signal was
given and went trickled down the
bureaucratic pyramid and on election
night it spit out 64 percent and Putin
receiving the results standing on red
square cried because the people overcame
the State Department cia-sponsored
alleged this is what Russian state media
claimed this wasn't actually true
overcame the this fifth column rising up
to defeat him and delivered this
spectacular result he is a pretty
informational II isolated president he
it is a system where people at the top
drink their own kool-aid which makes
them very vulnerable at the same time
they control the levers of power and the
levers and the incentive structure and
so you still have a court system a
police system you still have that is
deeply loyal because they get fed by the
system and he still has a monopoly on
violence and is trying to show that all
the time but I think I was just in
Moscow in the spring and the worry
wasn't so Russia has presidential
elections coming up in 2018 and it's a
foregone conclusion to everybody that
Putin's gonna you know right now he's
being coy and he's like I don't know if
I'm gonna run and everybody knows he's
gonna run he's gonna win and he's gonna
get another six-year term which is up in
2024 at that point he'll be in his 70s
now 60% of Russian men don't live past
60 he's turning 65 in October
and as I mentioned he's mortal and so
there's a lot of speculation and
nervousness in the system in Russia
right now about what happens in 2024 do
we do something with the Constitution so
that he can come back for another
six-year term but he's gonna die anyway
and what if he dies who takes over and
can he even have an exit strategy can he
can he have a successor he can trust who
will guarantee his safety and all of the
all of his ill-gotten gains he tried
that with me through Medvedev in 2008 in
Putin's mind he failed he allowed the
invasion of Libya and the horrible
execution of Qaddafi this was a video I
don't know the video went all over the
world and Putin was obsessed with it he
couldn't stop watching it because I
think he personally related to Qaddafi's
fate and is afraid of that so he moved
Medvedev aside and came back so if you
feel that you can't hand the system over
to anybody you can't trust anybody after
that he started filling gubernatorial
slots with his former cooks and
bodyguards that's a problem that's not a
stable system and that's a very
long-winded answer yeah I couldn't agree
more
we're all mortal including dictators the
differences they could be mortal on all
of a sudden and put knows that and I
don't think that 2024 is a big problem
for Putin or for others in Russia they
understand that you know things might
happen earlier because it's a big
mistake to look at potential change in
Russia based on the so called electoral
calendar it's just the day for Putin to
reappoint himself things will happen all
of a sudden because the elite will lose
faith in Putin now what is putting
strength simple he was a protector of
their interest he allowed them to steal
in Russia and to park their money
elsewhere
northern China not in Iran not in
Venezuela
but in kotas or in Marbella Spain in
Italy and in this country by the way
will be also I'll be very curious to
find out how much money was laundered
through certain real estate empires
because we know from again from all the
books that real estate was always at
most most perfect way of wandering
laundering money just for any other
dictators and facts around the world and
that's why Putin has been fighting and
the entire Russian machine KGB Foreign
Office fought Magnitsky law the law that
actually aimed at some people sell just
you know second they were searched here
of Russian bureaucrat Putin knows it
doesn't matter the mafia boss the capo
de tutti capi must offer protection to
every thug in his gang to every hitman
because this is the way it works
fool LT in exchange for full protection
if he is not there to protect their
interest abroad why they should be loyal
to him there and I think that is if
Congress actually will push this the
full implementation of new sanctions
that Trump unwillingly signed which
involves full disclosure of these assets
and I believe American intelligence had
pretty good idea where this money is
being poured in within the next hundred
eighty days this is the biggest issue
because as long as the Russian oligarch
some of them are just stuck in Russia
because they couldn't get a visa but
their families their wives that children
can run you know they empires from
outside inconvenience nobody's
challenging you to dictate out of
inconvenience but if their multi-billion
fortunes are in danger we should see if
there will be still well to put in or to
their money so there are many ways to
make Putin not just to look weak but
actually to to demonstrate this witness
that will be that will be apparent
that's another point by the way of
another example
Gary's completely right that of how the
system is weak when the all of your
elites when none of their wives or their
children live or grow up or go to school
or get treated by local doctors when
they all live abroad and you know when I
was in Russia in the spring I talked to
a high-ranking member of Putin's party
and all he could talk about was how
horrible life was in Paris that's a
problem like even in the Soviet Union
the elites lived in the Soviet Union
needs to block but they lived at home
like there was they were tied to the
fate of the country in a way that
Putin's elite is not yeah they've
already jumped so that's why my guess is
that Putin will continue playing this
new political poker by raising the
stakes and North Korean nuclear crisis
is a typical example he would like to
find any way to to divert the attention
of Americans and Europeans and while
creating crisis to present himself as a
peacemaker so giving clean out nuclear
technology was one hand and and waving
the olive branch was another one so
that's the game it's a simple game you
say oh it's primitive yes but it did
work it didn't work for him and he
thinks that this is the best the best
game that he can play and unfortunately
when you look at the world map
there's too many places where he can he
can continue this game by by creating
you know more problems and inflating the
the old conflicts that that or somehow
pacified that's the key that it's not
that complicated you know the Russians
have this self-serving saying that you
can't understand Russia with your mind
you can only kind of feel it it's crap
you of course you can understand it it's
pretty simple it's pretty primitive
and by overintellectualizing and over
analyzing it and seeing all these things
that aren't there we tire we trip over
our own feet when in fact it's pretty
easy Putin creates conflicts and
problems so that we can go to them to
him to solve him it just it to solve
them he doesn't care about North Korea
or Iran or Syria he just wants us to
talk to him as an equal that's it
because that's that may seem look strong
let me also ask a quick question both of
you have talked about the PR game the
ways in which Putin makes things look
and I'm curious of what you think about
his relationship to other dictators the
ways that certain much he's mode that he
uses it's also now being used by air
Diwan by other leaders it seems to be
there's kind of a plague of let me show
and my my favorite current Putin quote
I'm curious whether you have a comment
on when he said of Trump he's not my
bride and likewise I am neither his
bride nor his bridegroom yeah only
mini-me new viesta and if you think
about it that this is the classic
Russian way of saying in fact I am his
groom and he is the bride it's the
belittling of the opponent but I'm
curious about that
machismo in the way it has shown up and
it's shown up in different variations in
Berlusconi in the Bulgarian premier and
polish leaders and aired on I think in
some ways I'm just curious if you have a
comment on that certain style of
dictatorship yeah it's very it's kind of
the adolescent dream of masculinity and
in that I don't think you need a pee-pee
tape to explain why Trump is so drawn to
Putin I think it's the same reason that
Putin likes Mike Tyson and Steven Seagal
it's kind of a an adolescent
understanding of what a man is and what
what's masculine strength looks like and
Putin has I think a very similar goal
and as gary said he would love to run
America the way that Putin loves runs
Russia about spreading the free world
by the way when you look at the last I
think 10 or 11 years the reports of
Freedom House it's the number of people
living the free world has been steadily
declining that's it's amazing 25 years
of their the cold war we just you know
will be produced more slowly awesome
but I'm talking about it's just it's
about this some countries like Turkey
it's fifty years ago many of us expected
turkey eventually to become member of
European Union now it's a much closer to
Russia it's amazing who could have
imagined that the native country would
be buying Russian technology military
technology so but it's not I think
report on every dictator is it's it's
another bargaining chip I didn't release
was Assad it was a clear demonstration
did he care about Russian military base
yes or Neville days did he care about
Budokan us yes but the most important
thing was that Obama said Assad must go
put as a aah what is Obama what is Assad
this is it's again it's a projection of
strength and Putin is is a great master
of doing this and Syria was a clear
example message to everybody that's why
I think Kim Chilean now is so arrogant
because Putin already proved you stick
with me I'll not let you down I don't
think it's about that but it's also I
think about a response to American
democracy promotion and policy of regime
Putin in some way to some extent is
fighting the last war that his war with
george w bush and democracy promotion
regime change assad was also about
drawing a line in the sand and equating
himself with assad saying you cannot say
which leader stays in which leader goes
the people decide
ie the the dictator decides if he stays
or go and when putin talks about
national sovereignty he means that it is
the inalienable right of the dictator to
do whatever he wants with his people his
subjects inside his own borders and he
will send planes and tanks and special
and commandos to defend every dictators
right to do that because he wants to
defend his own right to do that the
reason he was obsessed with the way
Qadhafi died is he fears that he could
die that way the reason he watched
saddam hussein's execution on repeat was
he was afraid that he would be put on
trial and executed the same way so it's
personal to him
but it also should remember that all
these decisions sending troops giving
orders to sort of cross borders and
carpet bombed
innocent civilians they have to be put
in action by generals and by the
officers and while Putin you make all
the chemi cards because he has nowhere
to go
political death for him means physical
death he knows that so he'll stay in
Kremlin is he stuck there till the rest
till the end of his life but I'm not
sure that many of his generals or
Colonels or majors they have the same
they same attitude I'm not sure it's a
good example but remember that is the
States what's happened when there the
gun decided to shoot Russian plane how
many times did Russia violated Turkish
airspace afterwards zero it's good for
Putin to shout but then you have to give
an order for someone to do it and to
risk their own lives
and it seems to me that there will be
very little appetite for in Russian Navy
or in Russian army just to take this
chance so why did Putin stop his
invasion of Ukraine not because he has
changed his mind
he by the way that was a moment than
when he had to cut his losses
because after annexation of Crimea that
went smoothly which I believe you know
it was due to the fact that he has been
preparing for a long time so he promised
to take over 1010 Ukrainian regions no
forest don't know where see alway you
know from Lugansk to Odessa
he ended up with half of the two regions
why you know he decided to cut his
losses because he just realized that he
made as a blunder expecting
russian-speaking Ukrainians to embrace
his his invasion troops to the contrary
the majority I would save an
overwhelming majority of
russian-speaking Ukrainians ethnic
Russians joined the Ukrainian army to
defend against against the invasion and
Putin realize that the cost the the body
bags that will be sent back to Russia is
too high and
he's a KGB dictator he always looks for
maximum effect to be achieved with
minimum sacrifices so he is quite good
and measuring what he can invest in
human lives and money to achieve his
result and he stopped wisely recognizing
that the war was not as popular as he
thought and it will be too costly and he
didn't expect the Ukrainian army to
fight as well as they did he thought he
would just sweep right on through to
Odessa and he didn't expect it to be as
bloody as it was the other reason about
the other dictators he didn't need
necessarily he doesn't necessarily need
or bond in Hungary or erawan he did
really great with Schroeder when he was
in Germany and Berlusconi in Italy with
Sarkozy with Berlusconi who taught him
all about the wonders of plastic surgery
I'm not kidding
and this is why Putin also saw potential
and Trump he does well with people who
are like him who are absolutely cynical
uh Nigel Asha chol and are willing to
bargain and and and I think that all of
these leaders share that share that
trait okay let's open it up for the
floor why don't we start with this
gentleman here Monsieur
do you think the US has ever interfered
in domestic Russian or even Soviet
politics and for mr. Kasparov do you
think the US should interfere going
forwards given a threat of threat of
Putin I think that's a thank you for
your question it's a very good one from
the Russian perspective you know they're
just giving as good as they've gotten
from the Americans so from the from the
Russian perspective things like the
National Endowment for democracy George
Soros says open society all these NGOs
like golus that count ballots and make
sure there's no voter fraud that this is
America influencing Russian domestic
politics which is why for one of the
first things that the Kremlin did after
Putin came back to the presidency in
2012 is cut off the flow of American
government and
european government funds to these NGOs
because they see them as interfering in
Russian elections I'm just giving I'm
not saying that's was actually you've
said three times
you said Russia and I strongly disagree
Kremlin okay I'm also Russian and we
didn't believe America was interfering I
didn't know about America CIA and I say
you name it trying to actually foster
our movement we walked on the Moscow
streets it all said Peter those streets
they were peaceful rallies by the way
not no not that another glimpse of
violence not a single broken window so
all the violence came from the right
police and it was our domestic domestic
movement and of course in Putin's eyes
you know any any kind of support of
human rights organizations or others
like golus that was interference by the
way they had nothing to do with our
movement it says when you look at the
political movement you know it was not
connected to these human rights
organizations so that's why all we did
there was based on the local support
that we could get and to the contrary by
the way I can tell you that one of the
reasons that we couldn't rally enough
people in 2006/2007 because Putin played
this brilliant game garry kasparov boris
nemtsov you name that many of us said
Putin was already on the web or on the
way of dictatorship really and then all
Russians could see a big TV picture
Putin presiding over g8 with Bush 43
with I think was to Blair Merkel already
Chirac so how can you trust these guys
who are just crying in the desert that
Putin could D dictator when he was he
was chairing the meeting of the leading
democratic nations so putting you out to
play this game so as long as it fit his
agenda he was he was very friendly with
Americans with Europeans and as you--as
pointed out he was never shy of buying
favors and and that in the infiltration
of Russian influence through this kind
of clandestine operations was never as
powerful even at the probably height of
the years of commentary so we're getting
lots of questions let's
two on this side and then we'll take two
on that side well it's gonna ask you
another question but I think I'll follow
up on that line the United States is not
just interfered in Russia it's been
interfering in the interferes of
countries around the world for decades
going back at least to the overthrow of
the democratic government of Massa day
in Iran the next year Arbenz in
Guatemala multiple attempts to
assassinate Castro assassination so what
is yeah you're right we can go on all
night about United States interference
in other countries affairs so what's the
real problem yeah is it that one country
interferes allegedly interferes and in
other countries elections or inner
domestic affairs or is it the one
country interferes in American in
domestic in election electoral Affairs
so it sounds like the premise of your
question that was that electoral
interference and in other countries
elections is a bad thing right no my
premise is my question is double
standards hypocrisy and in one nation
that's always interfering in another
country interferes criticized when they
themselves are interfered with allegedly
I will stress he allegedly in other
words what goes around comes around
doesn't it okay next question on this
side please
because we're gonna do two at a time
okay so working under the premise that
Putin is a domestic and global problem
I find that waiting for Putin's death is
an unsatisfying solution and I find that
prying away the oligarchs is an
insufficient solution so how does the
civil society in Russia and the Russian
people how do they move forward in the
presence and absence of Putin yeah first
of all I strongly reject denounced any
moral equivalence between the free world
and communist dictatorships
it's it's appalling to hear the
statement for people who grew up in the
free world and they don't know what this
KGB or maybe know from the books one of
the reasons I never criticized American
invasion of Iraq which I think was a
mistake but I believe it's it's it's for
me it was impossible since it toppled a
dictator as someone who grew up in the
Soviet Union in the communist
dictatorship
I couldn't criticize any action and led
to the end of dictatorship they were
understanding that many bad things could
happen afterwards but still it's it's
there's no it's there's always choice of
a lesser evil and talking about this is
in America
interference in other countries in the
world it's looking over the big debate
but let me tell you one thing when you
look at the political map 40 years ago
just look at the end have a hard look
and you find out that every so-called
right-wing dictatorship whether it's
Chile Colombia Spain Portugal Taiwan
South Korea has been peaceful South
Africa transformed into market economy
and democracy
not a single communist dictatorship has
been peaceful transformed in the market
economy democracy people are still
suffering there so that's why I think
it's it's just the whole idea of just
all witnesses we can compare Putin's
actions or Saddam Hussein's actions with
actions of US presidents it's it's for
me it's preposterous
Oh answer the other question I think
that this is it you've hit on a very big
problem Russian civil society is kind of
on the run and pushed underground and
that's not a good thing because it is
hard for it to gather strength and it's
also radicalizes the civil society you
saw that for example in Russia leading
up to you know in the years between 1905
and 1917 when a more kind of peaceful
moderate revolution failed and the state
reacted with more and more harsh
draconian measures both sides both the
people in power and the people out of
power in the streets became radicalized
and you get 1917 the other issue is the
the issue of the collective so-called
collective Putin in the u.s. we get in
fall into the trap of thinking that if
we decapitate these regimes that the
next day they will all become
democracies democracy is really hard
work it takes generations of education
and vigilance and civic activism and if
for generations you have been you know
at the point of a gun or a you know
bayonet have been taught to be passive
and to not question authority and to not
stick your neck out and to not risk
things it's gonna be hard even if the
guy at the top is removed or his inner
circle is removed you still have 143
million people who have been conditioned
for generations to be undemocratic so
it's gonna it just removing these guys
and waiting for Putin to die you're
right is not the solution I keep coming
back to something that one of Putin's
advisers once said to me and this is
what happens when you I think or what
could happen when you're waiting just to
pry the elite off of Putin or to
splinter them he said look when the
system Falls he he by the way helped
Putin get elected his first time in 2000
he said when this system Falls it's
gonna fall in one day
but the system that replaces it will be
exactly the same and that's the danger
just make it comment as this I'm not
sure that we should buy the theory of
kind of genetic determination yeah okay
so maybe maybe this is they but we have
other examples of twenty essentially
they tell you it's it's not fit a
complete it's I agree there's a danger
unless I believe unless Russia goes
through the process of reconciliation
was passed unless we go through our
nerve work you know condemning the
crimes of communism and banning KGB and
you know having the proper illustration
so nothing will happen so it's very
important to to do what's what's what's
happened in similar situations in other
countries of course the magnitude is
much bigger because I may be so doable
so but I just just mentioned let's look
at the Korean Korean Peninsula it's the
same nation in 1953 they were divided
after the end of the war and they were
just you know the same people brothers
and sisters you know the same GDP so
this is the only difference was that one
was controlled by communists another one
was under American patronage now you
have two to two careers that are just
far apart they're just like you know two
different solar systems one is just the
biggest go out in the world another one
is probably the most efficient market
economy and and very strong democracy
what president's being impeached and the
head of the largest corporation
imprisoned so justice and it's the same
people so I think it's it's it takes
time but it's not you know it's not at
the end of the world so I believe that
Russia had more democratic traditions
than then couldn't then curry narrative
distri and what a lot of Russians who
live by the way outside of Russia now
and I think there's a chance there is a
fair chance not one there's no guarantee
chance that we can we can we can just go
back to family of civilization there's a
zero chance but I think the to follow
your analogy with Korea I keep looking
at North North Korea and thinking okay
let's say we take out kim jeong-hoon
and get rid of this regime it's going to
be an unbelievable task to rehabilitate
these people that have lived under this
regime for generations and you look at
Eastern Europe it has and it was a
foreign occupation in Eastern Europe
they had Soviet power for much less time
than than the Russians and they're still
much much better than the Russians
they're doing much better but they're
still dealing with these ghosts and
these problems that they look I'm not
saying it's but it's a problem we know
it is a problem but you have 20 people
you know just as just living in the in
the largest concentration camp in the
world so yes there are problems of
integrating in a normal life but it's
not the reason to say you shouldn't do
that sooner you remove Kim Chen and open
our out of power better the chances that
you can save millions of these lives
that otherwise would be sacrifice for
his paranoid our dreams I'm not saying
you should or shouldn't I'm just
outlining the array of problems I'm a
journalist I'm not a policy person okay
yeah so piggybacking off of this
question of what is to be done I think a
lot of observers of the American
election and specifically the Democratic
primary observed that in the u.s. we
seem to have a lack of a unified left or
even a lack of a unified opposition and
then that was especially visible during
the general election so over the last 10
years we've seen now finally we've seen
yaw block we've seen the progress party
in Russia we've seen your presidential
campaign and it doesn't seem like we're
that far removed from what the situation
was 10 years ago in Russia in terms of
who's in power so what I'm curious about
is whether you see a future for a
unified Russian left or at least a
unified Russian opposition and whether
or not you think that's even relevant to
standing against Putin
I have a very different type of a
question so so Missy you've mentioned
that like we should view the American
result American election result as a
combination of several factors which
includes like influence of Russia and
also the role of American people so my
question is like I'm very curious to
know what's your take on the role of
social media which has presumably acted
as a catalyst in exploiting
misinformation and also like from now on
like how should people take social media
and like what's the role of how should
people deal with social media and
misinformation that goes around I think
is asking the same question about time
and again about what opposition rush can
do it ignores the fact that Russia is
the one-man dictatorship that openly
braces fascist ideology anything that
happens rush is on criminals control if
any opposition action takes place is
because Kremlin believes that it
probably serves its purpose for some
reasons so there's no way that you can
you can go back to 2007-2008 or even
2011-2012 when we had massive rallies in
the streets it's over they just you know
they destroyed it completely and and
they control it so the only way for
things to change in Russia as was in the
Soviet Union is for regime to be weak
and we're talking about a geopolitical
disaster which doesn't mean you know
would stand a war so I remember that the
in my opinion one of the most important
events that led to the collapse of the
Soviet Union was the Soviet loss of the
war in Afghanistan just remember in
February 2009 ninety nine the Soviet
troops withdrew from Afghanistan by the
way it was not a stampede as Americans
from Saigon the war technically was not
lost because the Soviets could keep
Najibullah regime the pro-soviet regime
for another three years there I think
two and a half years so again
technically speaking you know they they
they they left Afghanistan with honors
but psychologically to watch Soviet
troops ripped crossing the border going
back had a huge effect in Eastern Europe
and the Baltic than Republic's and
across the Soviet Union
and by the end a year that year 1989 the
Eastern Europe was gone in less than
three years the Soviet Union was calm
again it's all about people believing
that Empire the dictatorship is weak and
as long as it looks strong nothing will
happen but if they realize that regime
is no longer as strong as as as it used
to be they'll fill the streets the
reason people are not there because
they're afraid it was you know there
were only five thousand people marching
in Moscow look here in New York or in
Paris there are million people yes but
here police protects you that's a
difference and it's it I was always
amazed to see thousands of people
rallying in Moscow streets knowing that
they could be beaten they could be
arrested and even worse so but now you
cannot blame them for not doing that
because they know it's nothing that is
compared to 2011 so that maybe a few
thousand here and there still insist
it's quite heroic efforts but they are
two minor and Kremlin Portland controls
the situation in Moscow and elsewhere I
would argue they're more widespread
though and in 2011 it was just Moscow
and st. Petersburg now they're in over
90 cities in Russia they're still small
they're under you know they're very
vulnerable generation and that's good
goes that bring us back to the next
question about social media so Putin I'm
like China Putin doesn't impose
firewalls but the Russian Criminal Code
has sort of a new new article almost
every day punishing people for evil
reposting some what Kremlin believes you
know anti-government rants or even like
well you just like yes even even even
pictures so and the role of social media
as I say it's it's it's there so it's a
most powerful tool and it's quite an
irony that Putin and and and other
regimes dictators dictators in the world
they know how to utilize the tools
invented in the free world to undermine
the very foundation of democracy what an
irony yeah
two questions on this side please I know
that in Russia there are parties to the
right of United Russia and there
ultra-nationalists like Alexander Dugan
the the fascist guy who wrote
foundations of geopolitics so do you
view these people who you know they want
to make expand the Russian Empire
takeover Lotfi and so on as this sort of
irrelevant fringe or they people who are
behind Putin animating his policy so
should we basically ignore the
ultra-nationalist Russian right or
should we pay attention to them and what
is their connection to this entire
situation at the end of our time just
quick I think it's hard to ascertain the
the validity of poles or elections out
of Russia and I'm just curious is Putin
truly that popular within the average
Russian whether or not it's because he's
strong and promotes a strong Russia but
he truly have a significant portion over
50% of the population and a second part
which might sound like a little bit of a
joke but I think it speaks to the
context of Putin's objectiveness do you
think Putin truly believes that he's
capable of scoring five goals against
international caliber hockey players I
mean do you think he really believes
that that was I've heard people have
seen him and he invited then Secretary
of Kerry to play hockey against him he
then made jokes that people let him
score goals about his popularity in the
polls that's a very good question and
the polls in in short are not accurate
Russian pollsters complain of very low
answer rates on polls and that it's a
self-selecting crew so if you don't
agree you're gonna not want to stick
your neck out and talk to people you
don't know about how you don't like
Putin and if you do agree if you like
him you're happy to share your opinions
so that skews things also because
there's been no alternatives to Putin
for so long he's popular just because he
lacks alternatives so it's a kind of
very passive popularity after after the
Crimean bump which was a very active
popularity
as for the young man who asked about the
right wing I think we do great question
I think we do need to pay attention to
it Putin is not an ideological guy he
will use whatever ideology he needs to
further his goals he has a utilitarian
approach to ideology so for a while
Dugan was in favor during the invasion
of Ukraine for example during this kind
of amping up of Russian nationalism and
jingoism at home he has since been
sidelined he has been fired from several
jobs and is kind of back on the margins
again so if it serves his goals he'll
use it and as soon as he feels it
doesn't serve his goals he'll find a new
ideology yes you're right he's been
fired because he was not radical enough
I remember where this debate ten years
ago it just was some of the other
liberals from Russia saying
Oh Putin was our only hope to prevent
Russian fascism my argument was and many
of our outside was Putin would end up as
embracing this ideology because that was
happened with every dictator and yes
just today the simple straightforward
use of dougen not enough when you look
at the current situation Russia
it's the it's those people are that much
worse the worst kind of reactionary that
comes from the Orthodox Church people
are actual burning cinemas because they
show the movie about Tsar Nicholas by
the way shown produced by very Pro Putin
producer somebody who signed a signed a
letter supporting annexation of Crimea
the state paid for this movie but again
it's just it's what's happening within
the regime it's it's it's like a
negative genetic selection it is if it
goes down the ladder so and Dugan is not
radical enough that's again that's
happening in every regime so that's why
again I III wouldn't say that you know
this do get is a problem the problem is
Putin the problem is the regime will use
whatever is available any and I did and
the end of the day it will use the the
worst that it can find because they just
by trying to keep this
anti-american anti-western and the
liberal hysteria they have to look for
just you know they have to go just to
the very bottom searching to the bottom
30 what should we do we should end yeah
yeah so by the way about there already
about the Buddhist popularity if you
have one restaurant in town serving one
dish its regular high definition
especially if every every every other
restaurant being open is burned down so
I apologize to the people who did not
get a chance to ask their questions I
think we all have to thank our speakers
today thank you all for coming
you